Blog entry for new JSPI API (#767)
v8/v8.dev: src/blog/jspi-newapi.md

---
title: 'WebAssembly JSPI has a new API'
description: 'We explain the new API for JSPI'
author: 'Francis McCabe, Thibaud Michaud, Ilya Rezvov, Brendan Dahl'
date: 2024-05-28
tags:
  - WebAssembly
---
WebAssembly’s JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI) API has a new API, available in Chrome release M126. We talk about what has changed, how to use it with Emscripten, and what is the roadmap for JSPI.

JSPI is an API that allows WebAssembly applications that use *sequential* APIs to access Web APIs that are *asynchronous*. Many Web APIs are crafted in terms of JavaScript `Promise`s: instead of immediately performing the requested operation they return a `Promise` to do so. On the other hand, many applications compiled to WebAssembly come from the C/C++ universe which is dominated by APIs that block the caller until they are completed.

JSPI hooks into the Web architecture to allow a WebAssembly application to be suspended when the `Promise` is returned and resumed when the `Promise` is resolved.

> You can find out more about JSPI and how to use it [here](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi) and the specification itself is [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).

Author: Well if as planned, I update the earlier blog post, it will no longer be earlier.

> You can find out more about JSPI and how to use it [here](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi) and the specification itself is [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).

Reviewer: Fair. changing the suggestion to "in-depth blog post".

> You can find out more about JSPI and how to use it [here](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi) and the specification itself is [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).

Author: suggest 'in this blog post'.
I want to leave room for the 'how it works blog post' which will be more in depth than this referred post.

> You can find out more about JSPI and how to use it [here](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi) and the specification itself is [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).

Reviewer: Then just "JSPI blog post". Descriptive link text FTW.

## What is new?

> ### The end of `Suspender`s

Author: Is this colloquial in the JS world?

> ### The end of `Suspender`s

Reviewer: As a best practice, we try to avoid mixing code font and regular font.

> ### The end of `Suspender`s

Author: I do it to highlight the difference between a proper noun referring to a program element and a potentially mispelt normal English word.

> ### The end of `Suspender`s

Reviewer: Yes, you just shouldn't mix code font and regular font. Just split it in code concept written in code font and prose written in normal font. https://developers.google.com/style/code-in-text#grammatical-treatment-of-code-elements

This has a number of benefits:

- It removes dependency on the [*Type Reflection Proposal*](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-types), and
- it makes tooling for JSPI simpler: the new API functions no longer need to refer explicitly to the WebAssembly types of functions.

This change is enabled by the decision to no longer have explicitly referenced `Suspender` objects. 

### Returning without suspending

A third change refers to the behavior of suspending calls. Instead of always suspending when calling a JavaScript function from a suspending import, we only suspend when the JavaScript function actually returns a `Promise`.

This change, while apparently going against the [recommendations](https://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/promises-guide#accepting-promises) of the W3C TAG, represents a safe optimization for JSPI users. It is safe because JSPI is actually taking on the role of a *caller* to a `Promise` returning function.

This change will likely have minimal impact on most applications; however, some applications will see a notable benefit by avoiding unnecessary trips to the browser event loop.

### The new API

> The API is pretty simple: there is a function that takes a function exported from a WebAssembly module and converts it into a `Promise` returning function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is straightforward: there is a function that takes a function exported from a WebAssembly module and converts it into a function that returns a `Promise`:
```

```js
Function Webassembly.promising(Function wsFun)
```

> Note that, although the argument is typed as a `Function` &mdash; i.e., a JavaScript function &mdash; it is actually restricted to WebAssembly functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that even if the argument is typed as a JavaScript `Function`, it is actually restricted to WebAssembly functions.
```

> On the suspending side, we have a new class `WebAssembly.Suspending`, together with a constructor that takes a JavaScript function as argument. In WebIDL this is written:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the suspending side, there's a new class `WebAssembly.Suspending`, together with a constructor that takes a JavaScript function as an argument. In WebIDL, this is written as follows:
```

```js
interface Suspending{

>     constructor (Function fun);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  constructor (Function fun);
```

}
```

> Note that this API has an asymmetric feel to it: we have a function that takes a WebAssembly function and returns a new promising (sic) function; whereas to mark a suspending function we enclose it in a `Suspending` object. This reflects a deeper reality about what is happening under the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this API has an asymmetric feel to it: there's have a function that takes a WebAssembly function and returns a new promising (_sic_) function; whereas to mark a suspending function, you enclose it in a `Suspending` object. This reflects a deeper reality about what is happening under the hood.
```

The suspending behavior of an import is intrinsically part of the *call* to the import: i.e., some function inside the instantiated module calls the import and suspends as a result.

On the other hand, the `promising` function takes a regular WebAssembly function and returns a new one that can respond to being suspended and which returns a `Promise`.

### Using the new API

> If you are an Emscripten user, then using the new API will typically involve no changes to your code. You must be using a version of emscripten that is at least 3.1.61, and you must be using a version of Chrome that is at least 126.0.6478.17 (milestone 126).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are an Emscripten user, then using the new API will typically involve no changes to your code. You must be using a version of Emscripten that is at least 3.1.61, and you must be using a version of Chrome that is at least 126.0.6478.17 (Milestone 126).
```

> If you are rolling your own integration, then your code should be significantly simpler. In particular, it is no longer necessary to have code that stores the passed-in `Suspender` object (and retrieve it when calling the import). One can simply use regular sequential code within the WebAssembly module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are rolling your own integration, then your code should be significantly simpler. In particular, it is no longer necessary to have code that stores the passed-in `Suspender` object (and retrieve it when calling the import). You can simply use regular sequential code within the WebAssembly module.
```

### The old API

> The old API will continue to operate at least until 10/29/2024 (Chrome M128). After that we plan on removing the old API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old API will continue to operate at least until October 29, 2024 (Chrome M128). After that, we plan on removing the old API.
```

Note that Emscripten itself will no longer support the old API as of version 3.1.61.

## What is happening with JSPI?

### Implementation aspects

The biggest change to JSPI that we are working on is actually invisible to most programmers: so-called growable stacks.

> The current implementation of JSPI is based on allocating stacks of a fixed size. In fact, the allocated stacks are rather large; because we have to be able to accomodate arbitrary WebAssembly computations which may require deep stacks to handle recursion properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current implementation of JSPI is based on allocating stacks of a fixed size. In fact, the allocated stacks are rather large. This is because we have to be able to accommodate arbitrary WebAssembly computations which may require deep stacks to handle recursion properly.
```

> However, this is not a sustainable strategy: we would like to support applications with millions of suspended coroutines; this is not possible if each stack is 1Mb in size.

Reviewer: Did you mean Megabyte (MB) or Megabit (Mb) here? Just to make sure it's not a typo.

Author: It's a megabyte.

Reviewer: MB then. Committed this change.

> However, this is not a sustainable strategy: we would like to support applications with millions of suspended coroutines; this is not possible if each stack is 1Mb in size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this is not a sustainable strategy: we would like to support applications with millions of suspended coroutines; this is not possible if each stack is 1MB in size.
```

> Growable stacks refers to a stack allocation strategy that allows a WebAssembly stack to grow as needed. That way, we can start with very small stacks for those applications that only need small stack space and grow the stack when the application runs out of room (otherwise known as stack overflow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Growable stacks refers to a stack allocation strategy that allows a WebAssembly stack to grow as needed. That way, we can start with very small stacks for those applications that only need small stack space, and grow the stack when the application runs out of space (otherwise known as stack overflow).
```

There are several potential techniques for implementing growable stacks. One that we are investigating is segmented stacks. A segmented stack consists of a chain of stack regions &mdash; each of which has a fixed size, but different segments may have different sizes.

> Note that while we may be solving the stack overflow issue for coroutines we are not planning to make the main or central stack growable. Thus, if your application runs out of stack space, growable stacks will not fix your problem unless you use JSPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while we may be solving the stack overflow issue for coroutines, we are not planning to make the main or central stack growable. Thus, if your application runs out of stack space, growable stacks will not fix your problem unless you use JSPI.
```

### The standards process

> As of publication, there is an origin trial for JSPI &mdash; see [here](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi-ot) &mdash; that is active. The new API will be live during the remainder of the origin trial &mdash; available with Chrome M126.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of publication, there is an active [origin trial for JSPI](https://v8.dev/blog/jspi-ot). The new API will be live during the remainder of the origin trial &mdash; available with Chrome M126.
```

The previous API will also be available during the origin trial; however, it is planned to be retired shortly after Chrome M132.

> After that, the main thrust for JSPI revolves around the standardization process. JSPI is currently (at publication time) in phase 3 of the W3C Wasm CG process. The next step, moving to phase 4, marks the crucial adoption of JSPI as a standard API for the JavaScript and WebAssembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, the main thrust for JSPI revolves around the standardization process. JSPI is currently (at publication time) in phase 3 of the W3C Wasm CG process. The next step, i.e., moving to phase 4, marks the crucial adoption of JSPI as a standard API for the JavaScript and WebAssembly ecosystems.
```

> We would like to know what you think about these changes to JSPI! Join the discussion at the W3C WebAssembly Community Group [repo](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would like to know what you think about these changes to JSPI! Join the discussion at the [W3C WebAssembly Community Group repo](https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration).
```

---
title: 'WebAssembly JSPI has a new API'

> description: 'We explain the new API for JSPI'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'This article details some upcoming changes to the JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI) API.'
```
